Okay, the tapes are on again.
As an English professor and a creative writing teacher, how does most science fiction stack
up from that perspective?
Well, that's the greatest problem a science fiction reader has is finding the good and
avoiding the bad because it's such a popular genre that there's a lot of really kind of
ordinary stuff being published.
And I'm teaching a course in science fiction now and I have found that the books we're
using are really good.
I think they're excellent books.
They're very difficult to teach in the manner in which one teaches a fine novel because
they're written as entertainment.
The texture is not so tightly woven, but the ideas are there.
In essence, what you do is discuss the ideas.
So really, it's one of the great skills for the science fiction reader is learning how
to find good stuff, using reviews, using as much as possible histories of science fiction,
reading the big names, and working out from there.
I know some science fiction scholars like Sam Moskowitz are kind of encyclopedias of
just enormous quantities of material that they have read.
And that's one approach to it.
That's not my own because I don't see the necessity of knowing and mastering mediocre
writing.
And really, in mainstream fiction, we do the same thing.
We try to avoid the bad.
And I think it's kind of strange that people who scorn science fiction often scorn it for
the bad stuff, but they don't read bad stuff in mainstream fiction as they can help it.
They just read the best.
It's getting so, there is enough science fiction, so there is a lot that you can say,
yes, this is good, this is the best.
And you don't have to read really inferior material until you become so enthusiastic
or so legend or tired or whatever that you don't care.
I think it was Barry Malzberg that said that science fiction is, I think he included racial
minorities and modern dance is the three things that are judged by their worst examples.
Yes, yes, I agree.
Is there anybody, who are the people that you tend to like?
Do you tend to read hard science fiction, fantasy, everything pretty Catholic in your
taste?
Yeah, I tend to read fairly broadly.
I am extremely fond of Ursula Le Guin in almost all her phases.
I think Arthur C. Clark is excellent.
I like some of John Wyndham, particularly The Day of the Trifids.
And of course the older people like H.G. Wells are fine.
Isaac Asimov is almost always good.
I think his foundation trilogy is a book that does something to the mind of the sensitive
reader from which he will never recover.
That is, it enlarges thought.
And just as Clark's work gives one a sense of the ongoing human quest, the meeting of
challenges, and moving beyond them.
That is really very fine.
These are the ones I like the best.
Of course there are lots of individual books like Miller's, Canticle for Libowins, that
are good.
I myself am not too fond of Heinlein.
I know that is probably a heretical statement.
But I read a statement he made about how to write that I think put me off a little bit.
He said, write as fast as you can, keep writing and never revise.
And I thought, wait a minute, we deserve better than that.
I don't particularly care for Heinlein either.
I didn't read him as a kid and I started trying to read him as an adult and I think that was
a mistake.
I think if you read him as a kid he's probably not so bad.
Yeah, I think you're right.
You're on a faculty and a small university.
How do your peers take your writing?
Okay, it's one thing to write something esoteric and get it into a journal, but you're commercial.
How does that set with people?
Well, it's really, it has been a lot of fun for me because, you know, really if you write
an article for PMLA it takes you fully as long as writing a whole novel.
And you do this and you get it published and you never hear anything about it again.
So though you took it and put it in a bonfire somewhere, maybe it'll appear in a bibliography
somewhere or someone might mention it in a footnote, but it's just, oh, it's some sort
of ritual that one does.
Someone, you know, that you like pain or something.
But I keep meeting people on the campus whose eyes are red because they got reading my
novel and stayed up almost all night reading it.
And they're all very responsive and very amused and they think it's great.
They don't think I've sold out because they're too interested in, I guess I'm the first
novelist that Principia College has ever had.
It's a new thing for them and they're enjoying it as much as I am, I think.
How do you handle the writing?
You do it after hours, every night, every weekend, take up all your spare time or what?
No, I am involved in too many other things to do it in all my spare time, but when I'm
involved in a novel I do think about it a great deal.
And I try to work every day if I can, but sometimes particularly in the month of May,
I'll have about four or five days go by.
I can't get to it and I tend to write in bursts on weekends.
Really, summers are the most productive time, so because then I can set aside some time
every day and work on it and then when I'm not working on it, I'm thinking about it,
it changes the nature of a novel to have to write it slowly because you're doing other
things because things occur to you.
Before you get a scene written, you see it's not going to work or a new angle occurs to
you or an additional aspect of the scene comes.
So I think in a sense it enriches the novel, but it also demands more rewriting because
you do lose the sense of continuity.
Do you do the convent, go to the conventions and meet the fans and the other writers and
get inspiration that way?
I have only been to two conventions of the Science Fiction Research Association, which
is an affiliate of the Modern Language Association, and it's not a typical con.
I'm going to go to the Archon in St. Louis this summer and I've met some of the St. Louis
fans, they're really nice people.
I'm not in that scene yet, I don't know much about it.
I think from what I've heard a lot of it's kind of bizarre with people dressing up as
monsters and stuff.
Yeah, you get your stereotypical type fans there, that's for sure.
One person you might be interested in talking to in St. Louis is Glenn Cook because I thought
of him when I was reading your battle scenes because he's got the trilogy where all the
battle scenes are laid out and the strategies and that sort of thing.
I think you...
I've met him, some people tell me I ought to get to know him.
Yeah, he's exactly who I thought about.
Now the similarities between the stories aren't that close, but you have that characteristic
in common.
I believe he has studied battles and that sort of thing though, that's kind of what inspired
my question.
I see.
Any plans for books outside the Three Rivers area, something more towards heart science
fiction or other historical type science fiction, or have you thought that far ahead?
I really haven't thought that far ahead.
I'm sort of three books ahead of myself now.
For a long time I've wanted to write a historical novel about 19th century Illinois.
In fact, for far longer than I've been writing science fiction and I may take time out to
do that if I can find the time.
I don't want to interrupt the kind of on rushing perceptions I'm having though with the science
fiction theory, so I'll just let that ride for now.
I think that in a sense when I planned that novel years ago, the idea of writing a novel
just sort of kept me in awe.
I wasn't sure I could do it.
Now I am.
Because the breaking of North Wall really surprised me into doing it and I discovered that I could.
I'm really glad that I was able to take what you might call a lighthearted approach towards the
writing of the novel and see that it is actually possible to do that.
To kind of wrap things up, how does one go about selling a first novel?
Well, I don't know that I know.
What you do, of course, is kind of study the market.
Find out the ones that you would really like to sell to and make what I call a hierarchical list
starting with the best.
In my case, I started with Del Ray.
I thought that was the best and they took it.
That's why I say I don't know because it's usually a much more complicated process.
Many publishers want you to send two chapters and an outline of the rest or to send a query letter first.
But luckily, I ran into Judy Del Ray in New York at a Modern Language Association meeting.
I asked her, I told her, I have this manuscript.
Would you read it if I sent it to you?
She was interested but very mildly so.
She said, yes, I'll read it.
I don't guarantee to do it very rapidly, but yes, we always do read on solicited manuscripts.
I finally sent it the next June.
This was December.
I sent it in June.
I did not hear from them until the following March.
One of the techniques is patience.
I said to myself, as long as it's out there, it's not coming back.
To longer it's out there, maybe the better it is.
I had a very easy time.
I was very fortunate.
Did you start writing the second one while the first one was still up there gestating?
No.
I started writing it the day after Owen Locke, who is the editor there, called me and said
they were going to take the breaking of North Wall and he said, do you have anything else?
And I said, no, I was waiting to see how this one would go.
But I was so thrilled by the acceptance that this idea that had been kind of germinating
in my mind immediately came into focus and I began outlining.
Okay, that's the list of questions.